--- Page 1 ---
1
Federated Learning in Satellite Constellations
Bho Matthiesen, Member, IEEE, Nasrin Razmi, Student Member, IEEE,
Israel Leyva-Mayorga, Member, IEEE, Armin Dekorsy, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Petar Popovski, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract
Distributed machine learning (DML) results from the synergy between machine learning and
connectivity. Federated learning (FL) is a prominent instance of DML in which intermittently connected
mobileclientscontributetothetrainingofacommonlearningmodel.Thispaperpresentsthenewcontext
brought to FL by satellite constellations where the connectivity patterns are significantly different from
the ones assumed in terrestrial FL. We provide a taxonomy of different types of satellite connectivity
relevant for FL and show how the distributed training process can overcome the slow convergence
due to long offline times of clients by taking advantage of the predictable intermittency of the satellite
communication links.
I. INTRODUCTION
There is rapidly increasing number of satellites orbiting Earth and collecting massive amounts
of data. These data can be utilized in three principal ways: to train a machine learning (ML)
model, to do inference, or to store it for later retrieval. We are interested in the first use case,
where the conventional approach is to store the data locally at the satellites and later aggregate it
in a centralized terrestrial location. But this approach requires massive amounts of bandwidth
and storage, induces large delay and energy costs, and potentially infringes upon data ownership.
Recent developments strive to alleviate these downsides and bring the training process towards
B. Matthiesen, N. Razmi, and A. Dekorsy are with the Gauss-Olbers Center, c/o University of Bremen, and the Department of
Communications Engineering, University of Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany (e-mail: {matthiesen,razmi,dekorsy}@ant.uni-
bremen.de).I.Leyva-MayorgaandP.PopovskiarewiththeDepartmentofElectronicSystems,AalborgUniversity,9100Aalborg,
Denmark (e-mail: {ilm, petarp}@es.aau.dk). P. Popovski is also holder of the U Bremen Excellence Chair in the Department of
Communications Engineering, University of Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany.
This work is supported in part by the German Research Foundation (DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2077
at University of Bremen, University Allowance).
2202
nuJ
1
]TI.sc[
1v70300.6022:viXra

--- Page 2 ---
2
the data. Along this line or research, distributed training of ML models is a major use case for
the sixth generation (6G) of communication systems [1], [2]. Specifically, the spatio-temporal
scope of distributed ML (DML) is significantly augmented by including non-terrestrial satellite
information networks. Hence, directly training a ML model collaboratively from distributed data
within a satellite constellation is an important step towards seamless integration of non-terrestrial
networks into 6G [3] and promotes a sustainable usage of energy resources.
Communication is an integral part of the training process in DML and has a considerable
impact on the proper design of efficient distributed training algorithms. Various aspects of the
communication protocols can be tuned to match the traffic patterns and requirements associated
with DML. Federated learning (FL) is a DML paradigm that operates in the context of mobile
communication systems and it has attracted significant research attention [4], [5]. In FL, a subset
of available devices participate in each iteration of the training process. A widespread assumption
in FL is uniform and random participation from a massive number of devices. However, satellites
present unique and predictable connectivity patterns that might not conform to the underlying
assumptions of most FL algorithms. This is because satellites move in deterministic orbits and
have, especially in low earth orbit (LEO) (i.e., below 2000km over the Earth surface), very short
contact times to ground stations (GSs), followed by a long offline period. Moreover, depending
on the communication capabilities of the satellites, i.e., whether and to what extend they have
inter-satellite connectivity, the usage of standard FL algorithms either 1) leads to a tremendous
delay between training iterations or 2) requires efficient multi-hop communication techniques
specifically targeted at this communication scenario.
The goal of this article is to analyze the unique challenges and opportunities of in-constellation
training of ML models from data collected distributively within a satellite constellation. Our
primary focus is on large constellations in LEO. However, in more general terms, we conduct a
study towards applying DML in multi-hop networks with deterministic spatio-temporal structures.
This is not only relevant to LEO satellite constellations but also to various kinds of mobile ad hoc
and sensor networks with repeatable patterns and predictive schedules, e.g., car pools and trains.
II. A PRIMER ON DISTRIBUTED MACHINE LEARNING
The traditional domain of DML training are data centers with homogeneous client nodes,
constant availability, and high bandwidth connectivity. This facilitates frequent synchronization
between nodes and the potential to (re-)distribute the training data as needed. Instead, DML

--- Page 3 ---
3
within the context of 6G and satellite information networks, where the clients are mobile devices
or satellites, is subject to intermittent client availability and limited connectivity. In federated
learning (FL) [4], [5], multiple devices collaborate to solve an ML problem using their locally
stored raw data, under the coordination or a central server or service provider. Each client’s
raw data is stored locally and not exchanged or transferred; instead, focused updates intended
for immediate aggregation are used to achieve the learning objective. FL developed out of the
requirements of training models distributedly on mobile devices from private data. The core
challenges that set it apart from conventional DML are [4]–[6]
• Communication constraints: Communication between the central server, the so-called
parameter server (PS), and the clients is a limiting factor and, thus, communication efficiency
is a central design aspect. This is exacerbated by the limited bandwidth, and intermittent and
unpredictable device availability, especially for mobile devices and wireless connectivity;
• Privacy: Clients have local datasets that are neither shared with other clients nor with the
PS;
• Non-IID: The local dataset’s distributions are potentially different and not representative of
the population distribution;
• Unbalanced: Varying amounts of local training data is available;
• Systems heterogeneity: Clients potentially have very different computational, storage,
communication, and data gathering capabilities;
• Massively distributed: The data is distributed over a massive number of devices. Typically,
the average amount of local samples is less than the total number of available clients.
These aspects need to be addressed by the training procedure, which is essentially a distributed
optimization process. In particular, the optimization goal is to minimize a cost function depending
on the local datasets with respect to the ML model parameters. This is an iterative process
operating over a number of rounds, where, in each round, the PS samples a subset of clients and
broadcasts the current global model to them. Each client then performs several local gradient
steps using a gradient-based optimizer such as stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Based on this,
the local model changes with respect to the current version of the global model are computed and
communicated to the PS. The PS waits for the reception of the local updates from all scheduled
clients and aggregates them into a pseudo-gradient, which is subsequently applied in a gradient
step to obtain a new iterate of the global model and start a new round until convergence. This

--- Page 4 ---
4
procedure is known as federated averaging (FedAvg) [4].
In contrast to distributed SGD, clients perform several local gradient steps before synchronizing
with the PS and only a subset of clients is sampled in each round. These hyperparameters must
be chosen carefully to avoid biasing the solution towards the dataset of a particular client. A very
common requirement to ensure unbiased convergence are uniform client participation rates. This
implies client sampling with uniform distribution, which is difficult to satisfy in some scenarios.
Furthermore, the communication constraints turn FL into a research topic that, in addition to
understanding ML and distributed optimization, requires comprehensive domain knowledge in
communications systems. FL involves communication of highly correlated messages from a large
number of devices. If this is not accounted for in the communication strategies, then the result
may be overprovisioning in terms of time-space-frequency resources, leading to reduced spectral
and energy efficiency. In recent works, this issue has been tackled by gradient sparsification and
quantization, over-the-air computation, joint source-channel coding, client selection, mobility
management, scheduling and resource allocation. In order to introduce the new challenges brought
by satellite communications, we first need to look into the features of satellite constellations.
III. FUNDAMENTALS ON SATELLITE CONSTELLATIONS
Satellites are classified based on their altitude of deployment, which determines their orbital
characteristics. LEO satellites are non-geostationary satellites deployed in altitudes ranging from
500km to 2000km, below medium earth orbit (MEO). Contrary to satellites in geostationary
(GEO), these require a high orbital velocity to maintain their orbit and, hence, move rapidly
with respect to the Earth’s surface. Furthermore, the orbits of LEO satellites do not compensate
for the rotation of the Earth [7]. Hence, every satellite pass might occur at a different position
with respect to the ground infrastructure, which creates the need for continuous adaptation and
management of the radio resources.
Groups of satellites working together as a system are called satellite constellations. In these,
the satellites are usually organized in orbital planes and, possibly, different orbital shells. Orbital
planes are groups of satellites with similar orbital parameters, which encompass the altitude of
deployment, the inclination of the orbit, and the ascending node. The inclination of the orbital
plane determines its alignment with the equatorial plane. That is, an orbital plane with inclination
0° would be fully aligned with the equatorial plane, and an orbital plane with inclination 90°

--- Page 5 ---
5
would be perpendicular to it. The former is also known as an equatorial orbit, while the latter is
called a polar orbit as, its satellites pass over the north and south poles.
Orbital shells are groups of orbital planes, which are usually evenly spaced and deployed at the
same altitude. Satellite constellations can consist of one or several orbital shells. Walker star and
Walker delta, illustrated in Fig. 1, are among the most common satellite constellation types with
a single orbital shell [8]. Both are defined by the notation i:t/p/f, which denotes the inclination
i, total number of satellites t, number of orbital planes p, and relative spacing between satellites
in neighboring orbital planes f. While not reflected in this notation, the main difference between
these two constellation types is that the orbital planes of Walker star and delta constellations
are evenly spaced across 180° and 360°, respectively. Furthermore, Walker delta constellations
typically have inclined orbits at approximately 60°, which allows them to maintain most of the
satellites in latitudes where the majority of the world population is located, whereas Walker star
constellations have nearly-polar orbits. More complex constellations with multiple orbital shells,
such as Starlink, are usually composed of both Walker star and delta constellations [9].
IV. A CLASSIFICATION OF SATELLITE DML SCENARIOS
Connectivity between clients and PS is primarily determined by orbital mechanics and the
satellites’ communication capabilities. A safe assumption on the latter is that each satellite is
either equipped for communicating with a GS or with satellites in significantly higher orbits.
This out-of-constellation connectivity can be regarded as a baseline communication capability
available for DML. In modern satellites, these links are often complemented by inter-satellite
communication links, which come in two flavors: intra- and inter-orbit links [10].
Intra-orbit links connect adjacent satellites within the same orbital plane, effectively forming
a ring network. Due to the stable relative position between satellites within the same orbit,
intra-orbit communication links have nearly constant channel characteristics and can be modelled
as fixed rate bit-pipes.
Instead, inter-orbit links, connecting satellites across orbital planes and shells, are more
heterogeneous in nature. As shown in Fig. 1, in Walker star constellations, satellites from most
adjacent orbital planes travel in similar directions and can be paired in stable matchings with
time-varying distance and, thus, channel gain. However, the same constellation also contains
satellites traveling in nearly-opposite directions, i.e., with high relative velocity that leads to
transmission impairments and short contact windows for communications [11]. Compared to

--- Page 6 ---
6
Walkerstar
Frontalview Topview
Bremen
Earth
Equator
Northpole
Bremen
Walkerdelta
Frontalview Topview
Bremen
Earth
Equator Northpole
Bremen
Fig. 1. Illustration of a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star and a 60°: 40/5/1 Walker delta constellation, both at an altitude of 500km. The
frontal view is for an observer in the equatorial plane at 0° longitude and the top view from the polar plane towards the North
pole with 0° longitude pointing down.
intra-orbit links, these links have higher management complexity and lower reliability. Finally,
communication with the GSs is a basic functionality and also occurs through time-varying links,
whose parameters must be adapted to the orbital dynamics of the satellites. Typical contact times
between LEO satellites and GSs are in the order of a few minutes.
Due to the permanent and predictable movement of the satellites, this communication setup
belongs to the class of deterministic spatio-temporal networks. Such a network is modeled as
a temporal graph with static vertex (node) set and a set of time-edges connecting the vertices.
At each time instance, we can take a snapshot of this temporal graph to obtain a conventional
static graph representing the current spatio-temporal state of the network. Each communication
node within this network, i.e., satellites and GSs, is represented as a vertex. Communication
between two nodes is feasible at a specific time instance if there exists a time-edge between the
corresponding vertices for the complete duration of the communication, including the propagation
delay between those nodes. A notable exception from the general spatio-temporal properties

--- Page 7 ---
7
of this network are intra-orbit links, which have no time-dependence due to the stable relative
position of the satellites. Within the temporal graph describing the network, these nodes form a
static subgraph that we denote as a cluster. The subgraphs forming these clusters are usually
cyclic and, in most cases, circular, i.e., the subgraph consists of a single cycle since they model
an intra-orbital ring network.
Another deviation from the standard FL scenario, besides predictable client connectivity, is
that the data is distributed over a number of clients that is several orders of magnitude smaller
than commonly assumed. While typical applications on mobile devices have access to 106 –
1010 clients [5], we are considering rather small population sizes with significantly less than 105
devices. This aspect, along with potentially very long delays between connections, implies that
the convergence speed can be improved considerably by maximizing the number of participating
clients in each training round.
Recalling that FL operates in a client-server architecture, it is only natural to classify satellite
DML based on the connectivity patterns among the clusters, especially, between the client clusters
and the cluster containing the PS. Examples of such patterns between a PS and five client clusters,
each containing the satellites within an orbital plane, are displayed in Figs. 2 and 3. The client
satellites are in LEO at 500km altitude and organized in a Walker star constellation with five
orbital planes and 80° inclination. Time intervals where a connection between at least one node
within the cluster and the PS is possible are marked in red. When more than one satellite is
present in a cluster, these satellites are spaced equidistantly within the orbital plane and individual
per-satellite connectivity towards the PS is displayed in dark gray below the cluster connectivity.
In general, these patterns can be categorized as
• Sporadic direct connection to PS, where communication between a client cluster and the
PS is only possible for short time intervals with long offline periods in between. This is the
most common scenario in satellite FL when there is no inter-satellite connectivity. Example
connectivity patterns are displayed in Fig. 2 for cluster connectivity towards a PS located in
a GS in Bremen, Germany, and a LEO satellite in a 2000km polar orbit. The core challenge
in this scenario is to adapt and organize the learning process such that every communication
opportunity is utilized to maximize convergence speed and accuracy.
• Near-persistent direct connection to PS, where a connection between the PS and at least
one client per cluster is possible most of the time. This is a model for many constellations
with intra-orbit ISLs. For example, Fig. 3 displays the connectivity pattern of each orbital

--- Page 8 ---
8
Online Offline
Towards a GS in Bremen, Germany:
C 1satellite
1
8satellites
C 1satellite
2
8satellites
C 1satellite
3
8satellites
C 1satellite
4
8satellites
C 1satellite
5
8satellites
Towards a satellite in polar orbit @ 2000km:
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5
t/h
0 4 8
Fig. 2. Connectivity pattern from satellites in a Walker star constellation with five orbits at 80° inclination and 500km altitude
towardsaGSinBremen,Germany,andasatelliteinpolarorbitat2000kmaltitude,respectively.Inaddition,clusterconnectivity
towardstheGSisshownfora80°:40/5/1Walkerstarconstellation,i.e.,thesameconstellationasbeforebutwitheightsatellites
per orbit. Connectivity of individual satellites within each orbital plane towards the GS is shown in grey below the cluster
connectivity. In all cases, the connectivity towards the out-of-constellation node is sporadic.
Online Offline
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4
C
5
t/h
0 4 8
Fig.3. Connectivitypatternfromfiveclientclusterstowardsasatelliteinequatorialorbitat2000kmaltitude.Eachclientcluster
corresponds to an orbital plane in a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation where satellites are equipped with intra-orbit ISLs.
Connectivity of individual satellites within each orbital plane is shown in grey below the cluster connectivity. While the cluster
connectivity towards the out-of-constellation satellite is close to persistent, the connectivity of the individual satellites is sporadic.

--- Page 9 ---
9
SporadicdirectconnectiontoPS Near-persistentdirectconnectiontoPS Inter-clusterconnectivity
P P
P P P P C3 C1
C3
C3
C2
C1
C3
C2
C1
C3
C2
C1
C3
C2
C1
C3
C2
C1
C3
C2
C1
C2
C1
C2
C1
C3
C2
t t
t
Fig. 4. Spatio-temporal graph models for FL in satellite constellations for different connectivity patterns. Three snapshots of the
time graph are displayed for each scenario. Client clusters are denoted as C i, while the PS is labeled as P.
plane in a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation at 500km towards a satellite in equatorial
orbit at 2000km. In case of singleton client clusters, which might, e.g., occur if the PS is
located within a GEO satellite, this is the conventional FL scenario. Otherwise, it requires
multi-hop communication and routing techniques specifically targeted at FL and satellite
communications to actively exploit the deterministic movement of satellites and enable
efficient training.
• Multi-hopconnectiontoPSviainter-clusterconnectivity,whereclusterscancommunicate
among each other, i.e., satellites have inter-orbit communication capabilities. Among the
considered scenarios, this is the most advanced and challenging, but also that which offers
the greatest potential for efficient communication techniques and exploiting the unique
properties of satellite FL.
The spatio-temporal graph models for these three scenarios are illustrated in Fig. 4, where three
snapshots of the time graph model are shown for each scenario. The client clusters are denoted
as C , while the PS is denoted as P. Observe that the third graph does not contain a PS, since
i
the distinction in client and PS cluster is not necessary anymore when inter-cluster connectivity
is considered. The communication and computation approaches to DML differ substantially
across these scenarios. Hence, in the remaining part of this article we discuss the challenges and
opportunities of each of these scenarios separately.
However, not all scenarios fit perfectly within a single category. For example, consider the
connectivity pattern in Fig. 2 for a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation at 500km altitude
towards a PS located in Bremen, Germany. This is an instance of sporadic PS connectivity that
benefits from the ISL communication techniques for the near-persistent PS connectivity scenario.

--- Page 10 ---
10
V. SPORADIC DIRECT CONNECTION TO PS
In the sporadic PS connectivity scenario, the clients have long offline periods between
comparably short intervals of connectivity towards the PS. This is usually the case when satellites
have no ISLs or the learning process is orchestrated by a single GS (cf. Fig. 2). Directly applying
a synchronous FL algorithm, e.g., FedAvg, would result in a very slow convergence. To illustrate,
consider running FedAvg under full client participation in a network with connectivity pattern as
displayed in Fig. 2, with a single satellite per orbit and connectivity towards a GS. Recall that
the FedAvg algorithm operates synchronously, i.e., it waits for all selected clients to return their
model update before aggregating the updates into a new global model. Assuming learning starts
at t = 0 in Fig. 2, each client obtains the initial version of the global model from the PS upon
its first connection opportunity. It then starts computing a local update and transmits it at the
second contact to the PS. The PS waits until all updates are received before updating the model.
Hence, the clients have to wait at least until their third connection to the PS before receiving the
first iteration of the global model. Referring to Fig. 2, it can be observed that, even if without
C , this first global iteration of FedAvg will take over nine hours to complete due to C .
5 4
This problem can be somewhat alleviated by a proper scheduling of clients. For example,
consider the connectivity pattern towards the LEO satellite in Fig. 2 and assume a new training
iteration starts at t ≈ 3h when C connects to the PS to deliver its update. Further assume that
2
the satellites require approximately 30min for local computation. The scheduler must make a
choice among several “sub-optimal” options. Either it schedules C to C , which will lead to the
3 5
next global iteration being finished around t ≈ 4h. This will leave C and C idle. The scheduler
1 2
can also include C and hope that it will deliver its update before going offline for several hours.
1
If it does not manage to complete within that time, the PS can either neglect that update and
continue, or wait for C to come online again. The first option leads to wasting energy and
1
computational resources in C , the second leads to a significant delay in the global FL process
1
with C to C being idle. If C manages to complete in time, it will still be idle during its long
3 5 1
offline period because the current training iteration will not be finished before it disconnects
from the PS. No matter what the scheduler decides, either C will be idle or C and C , leading
2 4 5
to unused computational resources and, thus, considerable delay in the training process.

--- Page 11 ---
11
A. Asynchronous Federated Learning
A completely different strategy is using an asynchronous FL algorithm, which avoids missing
communication opportunities altogether. Recall that synchronous FL methods like FedAvg wait
for all selected clients to transmit their results before updating the global model and starting a new
iteration. Instead, an asynchronous algorithm updates the global model whenever a client update
arrives at the PS. This allows the clients to constantly work on local updates while being offline.
An asynchronous version of FedAvg designed with satellite FL in mind is developed in [12] and
named FedSat. The core idea is to implement the PS update rule of FedAvg incrementally and
have satellites always work on computing a new update to the model.
This is especially well suited for symmetrical scenarios, e.g., a Walker constellation with the
PS being located in the eye of the constellation, where the equivalence to FedAvg is easily
established. However, even in scenarios with unequal client participation rates, e.g., when satellites
are deployed in different orbital shells, this method has better convergence properties than FedAvg
and the general purpose asynchronous FL method FedAsync [13]. A comparison of FedSat with
FedAvg and FedAsync in terms of convergence speed is shown in Fig. 5, where a ResNet-18 is
trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset in a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation at 500km altitude. A
non-IID distribution of the training data is considered, where half of the classes is distributed
equally among the satellites in orbits one, two, and the first four satellites in orbit three. The
second half of the classes is distributed equally among the remaining 20 satellites. Learning is
orchestrated by a PS located in a GS in Bremen, Germany. It can be observed from Fig. 5 that
FedSat [12] clearly outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches.
B. Predictive Scheduling for FedSat
A major impairment to convergence speed in asynchronous FL is model staleness, i.e., local
updates delivered to the PS can be based on significantly outdated versions of the current global
model. A straightforward scheduling solution to address this issue relies on the predictable
movement of satellites [14]. The idea, for each satellite during its contact to the PS, is to estimate
whether a local training iteration can be completed during the next contact. If this is the case,
the satellite does not retrieve the global model and remains idle while being offline. Upon the
next contact, it will obtain the current global model and complete a local iteration while being
visible to the PS. Thus, the update will be based on a much more recent version of the global
model, which leads to improved convergence speed. This can be observed from Fig. 5, where

--- Page 12 ---
12
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 24 48 72 96 120
Time [h]
ycaruccA
1-poT
FedSat with Scheduling
FedSat
FedAsync
FedAsync η = 0.01
FedAvg
Fig.5. FLina80°:40/5/1WalkerstarconstellationwithPSlocatedinaGSinBremen,Germany.Top-1accuracyasafunction
of the (simulated) wall clock time for training a ResNet-18 with non-IID CIFAR-10 data. Training is conducted in batches of
size 100 with a learning rate η=0.1. Computation of a local model update at the satellites is assumed to require 1min.
FedSat in combination with scheduling converges significantly faster than the algorithms without
scheduling.
VI. NEAR-PERSISTENT DIRECT CONNECTION TO PS
In this scenario, at least one node per client cluster can connect to the PS most of the time.
This permits the efficient usage of a synchronous FL procedure like FedAvg. If there is only one
satellite within a cluster, this is basically the conventional FL setup. However, except for LEO
constellations with a PS in a high MEO or GEO, setups with singleton client clusters usually fall
within the sporadic PS connectivity scenario. Thus, we focus on the case with multiple satellites
per cluster. Recall this implies that these satellites are in the same orbital plane and connected
via ISLs.
The main idea is, for each cluster, to route all client updates in a synchronized fashion over
the node currently connected to the PS. This not only enables synchronous FL without extensive
delays but also has the potential to reduce the communication load on the PS. Due to propagation
and processing delays, satellites connected to the PS at the start of the transmission are unlikely
to be connected to it after a message has been forwarded over multiple hops. Hence, route
computation needs to be predictive and should actively exploit the determinism of the underlying
temporal network. The straightforward approach is to forward each local update individually and
use contact graph routing. However, the synchronous FL PS is not interested in individual client

--- Page 13 ---
13
updates but in a combination of them, e.g., the weighted sum for FedAvg. By computing this
combination incrementally using in-network computing, the communication load in the network
can be reduced considerably. In particular, each node within a cluster waits for all scheduled
incoming local updates it has to forward, and computes a partial aggregate from the received and
its locally computed update. This partial aggregate is then forwarded to the next hop towards
the PS and keeps the communication effort of each node at the size of a single model update.
Instead, with conventional unicast forwarding, the number of model update transmissions scales
quadratically with the number of satellites within an orbit.
Implementing this incremental aggregation protocol requires a certain amount of coordination
among the satellites. This is because every satellite needs to know whether it has to wait for
incoming updates and where it has to forward them to. This is achieved with remarkable simplicity
since, unlike the common FL, the clients are all under central control and the orbital positions of
all involved communication parties are completely predictable. Upon distribution of a new global
model, which initiates a new training round, each client cluster determines a satellite that will
be in a favorable position to communicate with the PS when all local updates from the nodes
within that cluster are expected to arrive at that satellite. Then, a shortest path tree towards the
selected satellite is computed and communicated to all nodes. This predictive routing process is
based on models for computation, communication and processing delays. The complete protocol
is described and analyzed in [15].
In Fig. 6, the convergence speed improvement due to the usage of intra-orbit ISLs is evaluated
with respect to the algorithms described in the sporadic PS connectivity scenario. Again, a
80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation at 500km altitude is considered and a ResNet-18 is trained
on the CIFAR-10 dataset with non-IID distribution as before. This time, the PS is located in
a LEO satellite in equatorial orbit at 2000km altitude, which corresponds to the connectivity
pattern in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the gain of using ISLs is tremendous. This is mainly due to
the increased number of global training iterations manageable within the same time frame and
due to stronger convergence properties of synchronous algorithms. Moreover, the communication
effort at the PS is reduced from receiving 40 individual model updates to receiving only five
partial aggregates per global iteration.

--- Page 14 ---
14
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0 24 48 72
Time [h]
ycaruccA
1-poT
FedAvg with ISL
FedSat with Scheduling
FedSat
FedAvg
Fig. 6. FL in a 80°: 40/5/1 Walker star constellation with PS located in a satellite in equatorial orbit at 2000km altitude. Top-1
accuracy as a function of the (simulated) wall clock time for training a ResNet-18 with non-IID CIFAR-10 data. Training is
conducted in batches of size 100 with a learning rate 0.1. Computation of a local model update at the satellites is assumed to
require 1min.
VII. MULTI-HOP CONNECTION TO PS VIA INTER-CLUSTER CONNECTIVITY
This scenario is concerned with connectivity among arbitrary clusters, instead of limiting
the communication to links between individual clusters and the PS. The main complication is
that routes, in general, now incorporate multiple hops over time-edges instead of just having a
single final hop over a time-edge. Sensible assumptions motivated by the realities of satellite
constellations are that connections between clusters are time-edges that can have relatively short
lifespan and that the network graph is connected for all time instances. The communication and
computation approach is again to use predictive routing, incremental aggregation, and synchronous
FL as in the previous scenario.
Multiple-hops over time-edges in combination with predictive routing leads to a considerably
higher routing failure probability than in the previous scenario. Moreover, errors can possibly
occur anywhere within the route and not only at the last hop. This calls for sophisticated
failure handling protocols and poses the question whether a completely decentralized routing
approach would be better suited. Another option to add resilience and reduce routing failures
is multipath routing, where model updates from individual clients arrive over multiple paths at
the PS. However, all these approaches complicate incremental aggregation considerably as they
might lead to multiple copies of the same local model update being incorporated in the partial

--- Page 15 ---
15
aggregates arriving at the PS. Overcoming these inhibitions appears difficult but will enable true
in-constellation FL without the need for external orchestration.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
We have introduced and characterized the satellite FL scenario, which is the DML paradigm
concerned with the collaborative training of a ML model within a LEO satellite constellation. It
differssubstantiallyfromconventionalterrestrialFLduetotheconsiderablysmallerpopulationsize
and the deterministic predictable client connectivity. This changes some fundamental assumptions
of FL, while the premise of limited communication is, in some sense, even stricter than in
terrestrial FL. This is because the connectivity towards the PS is sporadic and characterized by
long offline times of clients. Moreover, due to limited resources, communication efficiency is a
key factor in the deployment of satellite FL, paving the way for a number of interesting research
and engineering problems.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A vision of 6g wireless systems: Applications, trends, technologies, and open research
problems,” IEEE Netw., 2019.
[2] M. A. Uusitalo et al., “6G vision, value, use cases and technologies from european 6G flagship project Hexa-X,” IEEE
Access, vol. 9, pp. 160004–160020, Nov. 2021.
[3] H. Chen, M. Xiao, and Z. Pang, “Satellite-based computing networks with federated learning,” IEEE Wireless Commun.,
vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 78–84, Feb. 2022.
[4] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. Agüera y Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep
networks from decentralized data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artificial Intell. Statist. (AISTATS), ser. Proc. Mach. Learn. Res.
(PMLR), vol. 54, Fort Lauderdale, FL, Apr. 2017.
[5] P. Kairouz et al., Advances and Open Problems in Federated Learning, ser. FnT Mach. Learn. Boston, MA, USA: Now,
2021, vol. 14, no. 1–2. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.04977
[6] J. Wang et al., “A field guide to federated optimization,” Jul. 2021.
[7] J. Ye, G. Pan, and M.-S. Alouini, “Earth rotation-aware non-stationary satellite communication systems: Modeling and
analysis,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 5942–5956, Sep. 2021.
[8] J. G. Walker, “Satellite constellations,” J. Brit. Interplanet. Soc., vol. 37, pp. 559–571, 1984.
[9] I. Leyva-Mayorga et al., “NGSO constellation design for global connectivity,” in Non-Geostationary Satellite
Communications Systems, E. Lagunas, S. Chatzinotas, K. An, and B. F. Beidas, Eds. Hertfordshire, UK: IET, 2022, ch. 9,
to appear. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.16597
[10] ——,“LEOsmall-satelliteconstellationsfor5Gandbeyond-5Gcommunications,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.184955–184964,
Oct. 2020.
[11] ——, “Inter-plane inter-satellite connectivity in LEO constellations: Beam switching vs. beam steering,” in IEEE Glob.
Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2021.

--- Page 16 ---
16
[12] N.Razmi,B.Matthiesen,A.Dekorsy,andP.Popovski,“Ground-assistedfederatedlearninginLEOsatelliteconstellations,”
IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 717–721, Apr. 2022.
[13] C. Xie, O. Koyejo, and I. Gupta, “Asynchronous federated optimization,” in Proc. 12th Annu. Workshop Optim. Mach.
Learn. (OPT2020), Dec. 2020.
[14] N. Razmi, B. Matthiesen, A. Dekorsy, and P. Popovski, “Scheduling for ground-assisted federated learning in LEO satellite
constellations,” in Proc. 30th Eur. Signal Process. Conf. (EUSIPCO), Belgrade, Serbia, Aug. 2022.
[15] ——, “On-board federated learning for dense LEO constellations,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Seoul, Korea, May
2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.12769