--- Page 1 ---
IEEEWIRELESSCOMMUNICATIONSLETTERS,VOL.11,NO.4,APRIL2022 717
Ground-Assisted Federated Learning in LEO Satellite Constellations
Nasrin Razmi , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Bho Matthiesen , Member, IEEE,
Armin Dekorsy , Senior Member, IEEE, and Petar Popovski , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—In Low Earth Orbit (LEO) mega constellations, general trend towards edge computing [13]. For example, in
there are relevant use cases, such as inference based on satellite ESA’s PhiSat-1 mission, raw Earth observation (EO) data is
imaging, in which a large number of satellites collaboratively pre-processed using deep ML models on the satellites and
train a machine learning model without sharing their local onlyrelevantinformationistransmittedtotheground[8], [9].
datasets. To address this problem, we propose a new set of
Since the raw data remains on the satellites, improving the
algorithms based on Federated learning (FL), including a novel
employed ML models based on new observations requires
asynchronousFLprocedurebasedonFedAvgthatexhibitsbetter
on-board re-training.
robustness against heterogeneous scenarios than the state-of-
A core assumption of the general FL setting is intermittent
the-art. Extensive numerical evaluations based on MNIST and
CIFAR-10 datasets highlight the fast convergence speed and and unpredictable participation of the clients, i.e., the satel-
excellent asymptotic test accuracy of the proposed method. lites in the considered scenario. In order to cope with that,
asynchronous algorithms have been proposed recently [14].
IndexTerms—Satellitecommunication,lowearthorbit(LEO),
However, the distinctive feature of the LEO learning scenario
federated optimization.
is the predictable availability of clients combined with very
long periods between visits to the same ground station (GS).
I. INTRODUCTION
In this letter, we investigate how this predictive availabil-
CONSTELLATIONS of small satellites flying in ity impacts the FL scenario when the training process is
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) are a cost-efficient and versatile orchestrated by a GS and propose a novel asynchronous
alternative to traditional big satellites in medium Earth algorithm. We conclusively show that our approach leads to
and geostationary orbits. Several of these constellations are superior training performance when compared to state-of-the-
currently deployed with the goal of providing ubiquitous art FL algorithms. In particular, our key contributions are
connectivity and low latency Internet service [1]. Their inte- that we 1) define the LEO FL scenario and identify core
gration into terrestrial mobile networks is an active research challenges compared to conventional FL; 2) propose an algo-
area, covering various use cases such as Earth observation rithmic framework and communication protocol for satellite
missions [2]–[6]. Presumably, machine learning (ML) will FL; 3) adapt FedAvg [12] and FedAsync [14] to this sce-
become an essential tool to manage these constellations and narioandproposeanovelasynchronousvariantofFedAvgthat
utilize their sensor measurements [7]–[9]. is particularly well suited for ground-assisted FL in satellite
The traditional approach to ML is to aggregate all data constellations;and4)numericallyevaluatethediscussedalgo-
in a central location and then solve the learning problem. rithms to verify our theoretical considerations. These results
Considering the vast amounts of data necessary to train deep showthattheproposedasynchronousFLalgorithmhashigher
neuralnetworks[10],thisinvolveshightransmissioncostsand robustness against heterogeneous scenarios than FedAsync.
delays.Moreover,consideringtheemergenceofvarietyofpri-
vate owners of small satellites, it might be prohibited to share
II. SYSTEMMODELANDBACKGROUNDONFL
the data due to privacy or data ownership concerns. The obvi-
Consider a LEO constellation of K satellites in L orbital
ous solution to this dilemma is to train locally and aggregate
planes.InanEarth-centeredinertialcoordinatesystem,satellite
the derived model parameters only. This is achieved by solv-
k, k ∈ K = {1,...,K}, has trajectory r (t) and the GS,
ing the ML problem collaboratively and only sharing updated k
although fixed in a constant location on Earth, has trajectory
model parameters. The distributed ML paradigm taking data
heterogeneity and limited connectivity into account is known r g (t). A ground to satellite link is feasible if satellite k is
a to sf s e a d te e l r l a it t e ed co le n a s r te n l i l n a g tio (F ns L) is [1 o 1 n ] l , y [1 n 2 a ] tu . r A a p l p w ly h i e n n g c d o i n st s r i i d b e u r t i e n d g M th L e v π 2 is − ibl ∠ e (r fr g o ( m t), th r e k ( G t) S − at r g a ( m t) i ) n ≥ im α um e. I e n le g v e a n ti e o r n al, an o g n l l e y α a e s , ub i. s e e . t ,
ofsatellitesisconnectedtotheGSatonceandthetimebetween
contacts is much longer than the actual online time.
Manuscript received December 15, 2021; accepted January 4, 2022. Date
ofpublicationJanuary7,2022;dateofcurrentversionApril11,2022.This Satellite k collects data from its on-board instruments and
work was supported in part by the German Research Foundation (DFG) stores it in a dataset D k . Due to different orbits and orbital
throughGermany’sExcellenceStrategy(EXC2077atUniversityofBremen, positions,thedatasetsoftwodistinctsatellitesaredisjunctand
University Allowance). The associate editor coordinating the review of this
possiblynon-IID.Afterthedatacollectionphase,thesatellites
articleandapprovingitforpublicationwasG.Zheng.(Correspondingauthor:
collaboratively solve an optimization problem of the form
BhoMatthiesen.)
Nasrin Razmi, Bho Matthiesen, and Armin Dekorsy are with the 1 (cid:2) (cid:2) n (cid:2) 1
Gauss-Olbers Center and the Department of Communications Engineering, min f(x;θ)= min k f(x;θ) (1)
U
br
n
e
i
m
ve
e
r
n
s
.
i
d
ty
e;
o
m
f
at
B
th
r
i
e
e
m
se
e
n
n
@
,
a
2
n
8
t
3
.u
5
n
9
i-b
B
r
r
e
e
m
m
e
e
n
n
.
,
de
G
;
e
d
r
e
m
ko
a
r
n
s
y
y@
(e
a
-
n
m
t.
a
u
i
n
l:
i-b
ra
re
z
m
m
e
i@
n.d
an
e)
t.
.
uni- θ∈Rd n x∈D θ∈Rd k∈K n x∈D
k
n k
Petar Popovski is with the Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg with th(cid:3)e goal of training a machine learning mod(cid:4)el, where
U o G f e n r i C v m e o a r m n si y m ty ( , u e n -m i 9 c 1 a a 0 t i i l 0 o : n p s e A ta a E r l n b p g o @ i r n g e e , s e .a r D a in u e g . n d , m k U ) a . r n k iv , er a s n it d y o a f lso Bre w m it e h n, t 2 h 8 e 35 D 9 ep B a r r e tm m e e n n t , T D he = obje k c ∈ ti K ve D n 1 k (cid:4) ⊂ x∈ R D m f , (x n k ;θ = ) is |D an k |, em an p d iric n al = loss f k u ∈ n K ct n io k n .
DigitalObjectIdentifier10.1109/LWC.2022.3141120 defined by the training task, where f(x;θ) is the training loss
ThisworkislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0License. Formoreinformation,seehttps://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

--- Page 2 ---
718 IEEEWIRELESSCOMMUNICATIONSLETTERS,VOL.11,NO.4,APRIL2022
Algorithm 1 Worker SGD Procedure workersbytransmittingthecurrentversionoftheglobalmodel
1: Receive(θi,i)fromthePS parameters along with the epoch. Client updates are incorpo-
2: θ i k ,0 ←θi, j ←0 rated asynchronously as they arrive. In particular, the update
3: whilestoppingcriterionnotmetdo from client k in epoch i is incorporated as
5 4 : : B D˜ k ← ← P R a a r n ti d ti o o m n l D y ˜ k shu in ffl to e m D i k nibatchesofsizeB θi+1 =(1−α)θi +αθi k (4)
6: fore τ ac ,j h + b 1 atchB i, ∈ j B do i,j where the mixing factor α ∈ (0,1) determines how much
7: θ k ←θ k −η∇ θ gθi (B;θ k ) (cid:4)cf.(2)
8: j ←j +1 weightisgiventoincomingclientupdates.Thisfactorisdeter-
9: endfor mined as α=α(cid:5)·s(i−τ k ), where α(cid:5) is a fixed base weight,
10: endwhile i is the current epoch, τ is the epoch the worker received the
i,j
11: Push(θ k ,i)tothePS global model, and s(i) ∈ (0,1] is a problem-specific stale-
ness function that may be used to reduce the weight given to
updatesbasedonolderversionoftheglobalmodel.Theratio-
foradatapointx ∈Dandmodelparametersθ withdimension nale behind this is that such updates are likely to introduce an
d.ThisprocessisorchestratedbytheGSandperformeditera- error into the solution as the global model parameters have
tively without sharing datasets between satellites. We assume already advanced further towards the solution.
that the satellites have very limited computational resources
available for the solution of (1). Hence, we consider the case III. FEDERATEDLEARNINGONSATELLITES
where the satellites work on (1) between visits to the GS and TheFLalgorithmsdiscussedinSectionII-Aweredesigned
usethecontacttimetodoanexchangeofmodelparametersθ. underthepremisethatdeviceavailabilityisdrivenbyarandom
process and that parallel communication is possible without
A. Federated Learning Background significant delay. However, the satellite scenario is fundamen-
tally different in several aspects: the number of workers is a
Solving the ML training problem (1) distributedly under
fewmagnitudessmallerthaninterrestrialapplications,devices
the assumptions of intermittent connectivity, heterogeneous
arealwaysavailableforcomputationtasks,butcommunication
datasets, and without sharing local raw data is known as FL.
is only possible during a small and highly predictable time
The most widely employed approach to this problem is the
window. In addition, at each time instant only a very small
FedAvg algorithm [12]. A parameter server (PS) manages the
fraction of workers is within range of communication.
learning process and keeps a global version of the current
While this scenario is best addressed by an asynchronous
model parameters θi to be learned. In each global iteration i,
FLalgorithm,wealsoconsiderthesynchronousFedAvgalgo-
the“epoch”,thePSselectsasubsetS ofavailableworkersto
i rithmasbaseline.Wefirstoutlinethecommunicationprotocol,
participate in the next round. It transmits the current version
define the satellite operation, and discuss the application of
oftheglobalmodeltotheselectedworkersandthenwaitsfor
FedAvg and FedAsync to the satellite scenario. In the next
all of them to return their results.
section, we design a novel asynchronous algorithm that lever-
Theworkersperformoneormultipleiterationsofminibatch
ages the predictable connectivity of satellite communications
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) over their local dataset. In
to implement FedAvg without unnecessary delays.
particular, in each local epoch the local dataset is partitioned
in (cid:5)nk(cid:6) random batches B ∈ B of size B = |B| and, for
B A. Communication Protocol and Satellite Operation
each minibatch, a SGD step is performed with learning rate
η [10], [12]. The loss function is based on (1) and defined as Communication is implemented in a client server protocol,
(cid:2) where all connections are initiated by the satellite. Whenever
g θ(cid:2) (B;θ)=|B|−1 f(x;θ)+g˜ θ(cid:2) (B;θ) (2) the satellite is not working on a communication task, it tries
x∈B to contact the GS. Hence, communication is either initiated
when the GS comes within communication range or directly
where g˜ is an optional regularization term [15]. Upon termi-
upon completion of a communication task. Upon connection,
nation, the updated local model parameters are transmitted to satellite k transmits a local model parameter update θi if one
the PS. The whole procedure is given in Algorithm 1. k
is available and was not previously sent, where i denotes the
After receiving results from all scheduled workers, the PS
current global epoch. Then, the GS updates the global model
aggregates the results into a new version of the global model parameters (θi,θi) (cid:7)→ θi+1 and decides whether satellite k
(cid:2) k
θi+1 = (cid:4) n k θi, (3) should continue computation. If true, the GS transmits the
k∈S i k∈S i n k k u th p e da c t o e n d n g ec lo ti b o a n l . p O ar th am er e w te is r e, ve t c h t e or co to nn s e a c te ti l o li n te is k t a e n rm d i t n e a rm ted ina a t n e d s
where θi are the local model parameters of worker k, and the satellite does not reestablish connection during this pass.
θi+1
is
k
the new set of global model parameters. After this
The computation task on the satellite is described in
Algorithm1.Toavoidlargedeviationsfromtheglobalmodeldue
aggregation step, the PS starts the next epoch.
toasynchronousoperationandlongdelaysbetweenGScontacts,
ThisisknownassynchronousFLandcanleadtoslowcon- 2
L -regularization on the model parameters is employed [15],
vergence speed if the PS has to wait for stragglers. One way
i.e., the regularization term in (2) is chosen as
to address this problem is to incorporate client updates when-
λ(cid:5) (cid:5)
e w v a e s rt fi h r e s y t p ar u r b iv li e sh in ed an in as [ y 1 n 4 c ] h u ro n n d o e u r s th fa e sh n i a o m n. e S F u e c d h A a s n y a n l c go a r n i d thm is g˜ θ(cid:2) (B;θ)= 2 (cid:5)θ −θ(cid:5)(cid:5)2 2 (5)
shown to outperform FedAvg in some cases. While the client with parameter λ. The stopping criterion in line 3 is a fixed
operation in FedAsync is as in Algorithm 1, the PS operates number of iterations that should be chosen such that the
differently and periodically assigns computing tasks to some computation is finished before the GS is visited again.

--- Page 3 ---
RAZMIetal.:GROUND-ASSISTEDFEDERATEDLEARNINGINLEOSATELLITECONSTELLATIONS 719
Algorithm 2 Synchronous Ground Station Operation Algorithm 3 Asynchronous Ground Station Operation
(FedAvg)
1:
Initializeepochi=0,modelθ0
,walltimet
1: Initializeepochi=0,modelθ1 ,walltimet 2: loop
2: whilestoppingcriterionnotmetdo 3: Waitforanysatellite.Uponconnectiontosatellitek:
3: i ←i+1 4: ifreceivedmodelupdate(θτ k ,τ)then
5 4 : : I S n i iti = ali S ze CH R E i DU = L S E( i t , ) θi+1=0 (cid:4)Predictiveschedulingofworkers 5 6 : : i θi ← ← i S + E 1 RVERUPDATE(i,τ,θi−1,θτ k)
6: whileSi∪Ri (cid:7)=∅do 7: ifstoppingcriterionismetthen
7: Waitforanysatellite.Uponconnectiontosatellitek: 8: Exitloop:Gotoline15
8: ifk ∈Si then 9: endif
9:
Transmitθi
tosatellitek
10: endif
1 1 0 1 : : else S i i fk ← ∈ S R i\ i {k th } en 1 12 1 : : ifS T C r H a E n D sm U i L t E ( ( θ k i , , t i ) ) t t h o en satellitek
12:
Receivemodelupdateθi
k fromsatellitek
13: endif
13:
θi+1←θi+1+ n
n
kθi
k
1
1
4
5
:
: end
T
l
e
o
r
o
m
p
inateconnectiontosatellitek
14: Ri ←Ri\{k}
15: endif
16: ifSi∪Ri (cid:7)=∅then
17: Terminateconnectiontosatellitek
model, leading to reduced delay. Algorithm 3 outlines the
18: endif
19: endwhile operationoftheGS.Inline3,itwaitsforasatellitetoconnect.
20: endwhile Communicationisassumedasnon-blocking,i.e.,communica-
tion delay is hidden from Algorithm 3. If a model update
was received, the epoch is advanced in line 5 and the global
modelisupdatedbasedonitscurrentversionandthereceived
B. Synchronous Ground Station Operation
update.Ifthesatelliteisscheduledforfurthercomputation,the
WestartthediscussionofGSoperationbyadaptingFedAvg
new global model is transmitted in line 12. The connection is
tothesatellitescenario.RecallthattheFedAvgserverselects,in
terminated in line 14.
epochi,asubsetS ofworkerstoperformupdatesonthecurrent
modelθi andthen
i
waitsforthearrivalofallscheduledresults
1) FedAsync: Implementation of the SERVERUPDATE and
beforeupdatingthemodelaccordingto(3).Anaïveadaptionof
SCHEDULE procedures in Algorithm 3 depends on the FL
schemeandthecommunicationscenario.IncaseofFedAsync
thisalgorithmtothesatellitescenarioisgiveninAlgorithm2.
Themainlooprunsuntilconvergenceisdeterminedinline2by (cf. Section II-A), SERVERUPDATE first computes the mix-
any of the usual criteria, e.g., number of epochs, elapsed wall ing factor α based on a staleness function s(i − τ k ) and
time,orearlystopping[10,Sec.7.8].Workersforthenewepoch then returns (4). As no client update can be fresher than one
are selected by the function SCHEDULE and stored in S i and orbital period, we propose to use a hinged staleness function
R i .Thenextversionoftheglobalmodelisinitializedinline5. following the definition in [14, Sec. 5.2]. In particular, let
S The co ro n l t e ain S s i t a h n e d sc R h i ed b u e l c e o d m w e o s rk ap er p s ar th en at t h in av t e he ye fo t l t l o ow re i c n e g iv l e in t e h s e : s(i − τ k ) = ˜s(t i − tτ k ) where t j is the time epoch j was
i processed at the GS and
current global model parameters, while R i holds the workers (cid:2)
that have not yet returned their model update. Accordingly,
˜s(t)=
1 if t ≤(1+ε)To,max
the inner loop in lines 6–19 runs until both sets are empty. In (1+a(t−(1+ε)To,max))−1 otherwise
line 7, the GS waits for any satellite to connect. If it is in S i , (6)
the current global model is sent, the satellite is removed from for some small ε ≥ 0, a positive constant a, and To,max
S andtheconnectionisterminated.IfnotinS butinR ,the
i i i being the maximum orbital period within the constellation.
GS expects that the satellite transmitted a local model update The scheduler can easily calculate the value of s(·) at the
that is incorporated in the new version of the global model
next pass of a given satellite. Hence, it is possible to conserve
parameters in line 13. Then, the satellite is removed from R
i energy and computational resources by setting SCHEDULE(k,
and the algorithm returns to line 7. t) to false if the weight α will be below a certain threshold.
The key difference to vanilla FedAvg is that the communi-
cation is asynchronous to allow scheduling of satellites not IV. UNROLLEDFEDERATEDAVERAGINGALGORITHM
simultaneously visible to the GS, while the update is still
Synchronous FL procedures applied to ground-assisted
computed synchronously. Animportantobservation isthatthe
satellite in-constellation learning suffer from high latencies.
workloopinlines6–19isblocking,i.e.,itwaitsforallsched-
This can be alleviated by asynchronous FL procedures like
uled satellites to connect twice to the GS before starting a
FedAsync. However, under full client participation and ade-
new epoch. Assuming the satellite does not finish computa-
quately chosen hyperparameters, FedAvg has stronger con-
tion within a single pass, this implies that one epoch takes at
vergence properties than FedAsync. Hence, it is desirable to
least one orbital period on average. However, with multiple
implementFedAvginanasynchronousway.Leveragingonthe
satellites scheduled, this time increases.
predictable connectivity of satellites, this is indeed possible.
From an optimization theoretic perspective, Algorithm 2 is
First, consider a near-polar Walker Delta Pattern
equivalent to FedProx [15], a FedAvg variant that uses the
Constellation [16] with single orbital shell and a GS
regularization in (5). Convergence follows from [15, Th. 4].
located at the North Pole. This is a symmetrical scenario
where every satellite visits the GS exactly once per orbital
C. Asynchronous Ground Station Operation
period. Moreover, the sequence of connecting satellites
In contrast to Algorithm 2, asynchronous FL operation to the GS is constant, i.e., if the satellites are ordered
allowsthesatellitestoworkondifferentversionsoftheglobal such that, within some interval [t,t + T o ] with T o being

--- Page 4 ---
720 IEEEWIRELESSCOMMUNICATIONSLETTERS,VOL.11,NO.4,APRIL2022
the orbital period, the sequence of satellite contacts is
1 → 2 → 3 → ··· → K, then this sequence is repeated in
every following orbital period.
In this case, the FedAvg update rule in (3) with full
client participation can be implemented incrementally with-
out requiring synchronicity in the update phase. In particular,
supposesatellitekvisitstheGSattimet
i1
(withepochi1)and
again at t
i2
= t
i1
+T o. Then, the client update θi
k
2 is based
on θi1 +1 and can be incorporated in the global model as
θi2 +1 =θi2 −α (θi1 −θi2), (7) Fig.1. Top-1accuracyforaGSinBremenwithNon-IIDMNISTdata.
k k k
wheretheweightα = nk accountsfordifferentdatasetsizes.
k n
There areexactly K updates ineach orbitalperiod and, due to
the periodicity of the satellite-GS contact order, the resulting
modelafteramultipleofKepochsshouldbeclosetothatfrom
Algorithm 2. More generally, consider a constellation where
therevisitperiodofeachsatellitewithrespecttoanarbitrarily
located (but fixed) GS is approaching the same value. Then,
the proposed procedure in Algorithm 3 with SERVERUPDATE
function as in (7) converges as established in [17, Sec. 2].
Finally,consideraconstellationwithmultipleorbitalshells.
Theassumptionaboutequalrevisitratesusuallydoesnothold
in this case. Following the discussion in [17] this does not Fig.2. Top-1accuracyforaGSinBremenwithNon-IIDCIFARdata.
prevent convergence but might result in a biased solution.
However, this is also the case for many other state-of-the-art
FL algorithms, including the methods presented here. Indeed,
the numerical results in the next section will show that this
effect is much less pronounced in this algorithm than in the
asynchronous baseline FedAsync.
V. EMPIRICALRESULTS
We numerically evaluate the performance of the proposed
algorithms in terms of the test accuracy on the MNIST [18]
and CIFAR-10 [19] datasets. For MNIST, we train a logis-
tic regression model with 7850 trainable parameters [15]. Fig. 3. Top-1 accuracy for a GS at the North Pole with IID CIFAR data.
FedAsyncwithα=0.3andwithoutstalenessfunction.
The expected accuracy of centralized training is around 89%.
For CIFAR, we train a ResNet-18 that can achieve an accu-
racy of slightly above 90% when trained centrally [20]. The First, consider the case where the GS is located in Bremen,
training dataset is distributed randomly over all workers with Germany, and the data has non-IID distribution. This sce-
equal local dataset sizes. Each satellite operates according to nario poses considerable challenges to the algorithms due to
Algorithm 1 with η = 0.1 and λ = 0, where a single pass non-uniform device participation and heterogeneous datasets.
over the local dataset is done in batches of size 10 between Figures 1 and 2 display the test accuracy for MNIST and
GS contacts. We rely on the FedML framework [21] for our CIFAR, respectively. FedAvg exhibits almost instantaneous
FLimplementation.Intheresults(Algorithm2),wereferto2 convergence for MNIST after a delay of 2T o,max, which
as“FedAvg,”totheasynchronousbaselineinSectionIII-C1as is due to the simple model. Instead, in the CIFAR experi-
“FedAsync,” and to the algorithm in Section IV as “FedSat.” ment, the accuracy resembles a step function with very slow
The staleness function for FedAsync, if used, has parame- convergence. This clearly shows the inadequacy of FedAvg,
ters ε = 0.01 and a = 5(1+(cid:7))T o,max, where, by Kepler’s and synchronous algorithms in general, in ground-assisted
third law, T o,max ≈ 127min. The mixing parameter α for satellite learning. In both experiments, FedAsync exhibits
FedAsync was fine-tuned for each experiment individually. faster convergence than FedAvg but shows inferior training
A satellite constellation with two orbital shells at alti- performance. Interestingly, the staleness function proposed
tudes 500km and 2000km, respectively, containing five in (6) is necessary for stable convergence for MNIST but
satellites each is considered. Both are Walker Delta con- has negative impact on CIFAR training. The mixing factor
stellations [16] with inclination angle of 80
◦
and five
α(cid:5)
is set to 0.5 and 0.1 for MNIST and CIFAR, respectively,
orbital planes. They are shifted such that the minimum and the learning rate η for FedAsync is 0.01. The proposed
difference in right ascension of the ascending node (RAAN) FedSat algorithm shows superior training performance, both
between shells is 36 ◦ . The minimum elevation angle α e is in convergence speed and final test accuracy.
◦
10 . For the non-IID cases, half of the available classes are Next, we consider a homogeneous scenario with IID data
distributedtothe500kmorbitalshellandtheotherhalftothat distributionandGSattheNorthPole.Theaccuracyresultsare
at 2000km. shown in Fig. 3. The FedAvg behavior is as before, but with

--- Page 5 ---
RAZMIetal.:GROUND-ASSISTEDFEDERATEDLEARNINGINLEOSATELLITECONSTELLATIONS 721
an asynchronous learning algorithm without sacrificing train-
ing performance. This reduces the training time of FedAvg
by several hours and leads to an algorithm that outperforms
FedAsync both in convergence time and test accuracy. The
proposedalgorithmalsohaslesshyperparameterstotunethan
FedAsync.
In this initial work, several topics were left open for
future work, including proper scheduling of workers, multiple
data exchanges during a single GS pass, and employing
multiple GS. These approaches could lead to considerably
faster training.
Fig.4. Top-1accuracyforaGSinBremenwithIIDCIFARdata.FedAsync
withα=0.3andwithoutstalenessfunction.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the North-German
Supercomputing Alliances.
REFERENCES
[1] I.delPortillo,B.G.Cameron,andE.F.Crawley,“Atechnicalcompar-
ison of three low earth orbit satellite constellation systems to provide
globalbroadband,”ActaAstronaut.,vol.159,pp.123–135,Jun.2019.
[2] I.Leyva-Mayorgaetal.,“LEOsmall-satelliteconstellationsfor5Gand
beyond-5Gcommunications,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.184955–184964,
2020.
[3] Y. Qian, “Integrated terrestrial-satellite communication networks and
services,”IEEEWirelessCommun.,vol.27,no.6,pp.2–3,Dec.2020.
Fig. 5. Top-1 accuracy for uniform client sampling with IID and Non-IID [4] O.Kodhelietal.,“Satellitecommunicationsinthenewspaceera:Asur-
CIFARdata.FedAsyncwithoutstalenessfunction. veyandfuturechallenges,”IEEECommun.SurveysTuts.,vol.23,no.1,
pp.70–109,1stQuart.,2021.
[5] B.Di,L.Song,Y.Li,andH.V.Poor,“Ultra-denseLEO:Integrationof
shortertimeperiodsbetweenupdates.Thisisbecausethecon-
satelliteaccessnetworksinto5Gandbeyond,”IEEEWirelessCommun.,
stellation revolves around the GS. Among the asynchronous vol.26,no.2,pp.62–69,Apr.2019.
algorithms,FedAsynchasaminoredgeoverFedSat.However, [6] Z. Lin, M. Lin, T. de Cola, J.-B. Wang, W.-P. Zhu, and J. Cheng,
this requires fine-tuning of the additional hyperparameter α, “Supporting IoT with rate-splitting multiple access in satellite and
aerial-integrated networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 14,
which has optimal value 0.3 in this case. Finally, Fig. 4 dis- pp.11123–11134,Jul.2021.
playsresultsforthesamedatadistributionasbefore,butfora [7] M. A. Vazquez et al., “Machine learning for satellite communications
GS in Bremen. This introduces non-uniform device participa- operations,”IEEECommun.Mag.,vol.59,no.2,pp.22–27,Feb.2021.
[8] G. Giuffrida et al., “CloudScout: A deep neural network for on-board
tion into the previous experiment and could be considered the
clouddetectiononhyperspectralimages,”RemoteSens.,vol.12,no.14,
middle ground between both experiments. The core observa- p.2205,Jul.2020.
tion to be made is that FedAsync now performs strictly worse [9] G.Mateo-Garciaetal.,“Towardsglobalfloodmappingonboardlowcost
than FedSat. We conclude from this that the proposed method satelliteswithmachinelearning,”Sci.Rep.,vol.11,p.7249,Mar.2021.
[10] I.Goodfellow,Y.Bengio,andA.Courville,DeepLearning.Cambridge,
exhibits considerably higher robustness against heterogeneity,
MA,USA:MITPress,2016.
which is an important property for the scenario at hand. [11] J.Konecˇný,H.B.McMahan,andD.Ramage,“Federatedoptimization:
In conclusion, these experiments verify our theoretical con- Distributed optimization beyond the datacenter,” in Proc. 8th NIPS
siderations. We have observed that a naïve implementation WorkshopOptim.Mach.Learn.(OPT),Dec.2015.
[12] H.B.McMahan,E.Moore,D.Ramage,S.Hampson,andB.A.Y.Arcas,
of FedAvg [12] leads to tremendous delays and that the
“Communication-efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralized
state-of-the-artinasynchronousFLalgorithms,i.e.,FedAsync, data,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. Artif. Intell. Statist. (AISTATS), vol. 54,
struggles to deal with the inherent heterogeneity of the satel- Apr.2017.
[13] X. Wang, Y. Han, V. C. M. Leung, D. Niyato, X. Yan, and X. Chen,
lite learning scenario. We conjecture that this is not only the
“Convergenceofedgecomputinganddeeplearning:Acomprehensive
case for satellite constellations but also for general FL sce- survey,”IEEECommun.SurveysTuts.,vol.22,no.2,pp.869–904,2nd
narios with heterogeneity. This is supported by an additional Quart.,2020.
simulationintheFig.5.Instead,theproposedalgorithmshows [14] C.Xie,O.Koyejo,andI.Gupta,“Asynchronousfederatedoptimization,”
excellent performance in all experiments.1 inProc.Annu.WorkshopOptim.Mach.Learn.(OPT),Dec.2020.
[15] T.Li,A.K.Sahu,M.Zaheer,M.Sanjabi,A.Talwalkar,andV.Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. Mach.
Learn.Syst.(MLSys),Austin,TX,USA,Mar.2020,pp.429–450.
VI. CONCLUSION [16] J.G.Walker,“Satelliteconstellations,”J.Brit.Interplanet.Soc.,vol.37,
pp.559–571,Dec.1984.
We have considered FL in LEO constellations where
[17] A.Nedic´,D.Bertsekas,andV.Borkar,“Distributedasynchronousincre-
satellites collaboratively train a ML model without sharing mentalsubgradientmethods,”inStudiesinComputationalMathematics,
their local datasets. Unique challenges compared to terres- vol.8.Amsterdam,TheNetherlands:Elsevier,2001,pp.381–407.
trial networks were identified and addressed by adapting [18] Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. J. C. Burges. “The MNIST Database
of Handwritten Digits.” Accessed: Dec. 15, 2021. [Online]. Available:
FedAvg and FedAsync to this setting. We have demonstrated
http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/
how to unroll FedAvg by exploiting the deterministic worker [19] A.Krizhevsky,“Learningmultiplelayersoffeaturesfromtinyimages,”
availability and, effectively, convert it from a synchronous to Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, USA, Rep. R-2009,
2009.
[20] K.He,X.Zhang,S.Ren,andJ.Sun,“Deepresiduallearningforimage
1The oscillatory behavior of FedAsync in Fig. 5 for non-IID data could recognition,”MicrosoftRes.,Redmond,WA,USA,Rep.,2015.[Online].
not be avoided by tuning α and η. Careful selection of a staleness function Available:https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385
and a decaying learning rate might help to dampen this behavior. However, [21] C.Heetal.,“FedML:Aresearchlibraryandbenchmarkforfederated
thegeneraltrendisapparentandsupportsourconclusions. machinelearning,”2020,arXiv:2007.13518.