--- Page 1 ---
Scheduling for Ground-Assisted Federated Learning
in LEO Satellite Constellations
Nasrin Razmi∗†, Bho Matthiesen∗†, Armin Dekorsy∗†, and Petar Popovski‡∗
∗University of Bremen, U Bremen Excellence Chair, Dept. of Communications Engineering, Germany
†Gauss-Olbers Center c/o University of Bremen, Dept. of Communications Engineering, Germany
‡Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
Email:{razmi, matthiesen, dekorsy}@ant.uni-bremen.de, petarp@es.aau.dk
Abstract—Distributed training of machine learning models
directly on satellites in low Earth orbit (LEO) is considered.
Basedonafederatedlearning(FL)algorithmspecificallytargeted
at the unique challenges of the satellite scenario, we design
a scheduler that exploits the predictability of visiting times
between ground stations (GS) and satellites to reduce model
staleness.Numericalexperimentsshowthatthiscanimprovethe
convergence speed by a factor three. Parameter Server
IndexTerms—LEOconstellation,Federatedlearning,Schedul-
ing.
I. INTRODUCTION
ThesmalllowEarthorbit(LEO)satellites,efficientinterms
of cost and deployment, are marking a new era in satellite
communications, as well as their integration with terrestrial
networks. These LEO satellites are commonly deployed in Fig.1. FLforEarthobservationapplications.
large constellations, thereby creating a moving infrastructure
for a seamless global coverage for, various applications such of FL on satellites. In [6], it is shown that the presence of
as communication services and Earth observation [1]. Many inter-satellite links (ISL) improves the convergence speed of
of these applications are data-intensive. For instance, in Earth FL on satellites considerably. Without this capability, several
observation,thehighspatial,spectral,andtemporalresolution extensionsoftheapproachin[5]arepossiblethatmightleadto
of the imaging equipment, lead to large amounts of collected fasterconvergencespeed.Indeed,theauthorsof[7]considera
data[2].Thesedataareusedinavarietyofapplications,such heuristicGSupdateprocedureandgradientbufferingtospeed
as disaster prevention, environmental monitoring, and urban up convergence.
planning.TransmittingsuchalargeamountofdatatotheEarth In this paper, we take a different approach and design a
may not be practical due to scarcity of the radio frequency scheduler based on the predictability of GS-satellite visiting
resources or stringent delay requirements [3]. lengths to reduce the model staleness. This leads to signifi-
To address these constraints, a plausible solution is to cantly faster convergence speed than the baseline approach in
process the data directly on-board of the satellites and only [5]andcanbecombinedwithdifferentaggregationrules,such
transmittheabstractedinformationtothegroundstation(GS). as the one in [7].
In this regard, it is viable to use federated learning (FL) [4], II. SYSTEMMODEL
as a cooperative machine learning (ML) scheme in which the
We consider a LEO satellite constellation with P circular
satellites only need to transmit the model parameters to the
orbitswherethep-thorbitcontainsK satellites.ThesetK=
server instead of the raw data. Fig. 1 depicts the usage of p
FL for Earth observation. In the original FL setup, the user’s {S 1 ,S 2 ,...,S K } denotes all K =
(cid:80)P
p=1 K p satellites. The
participationinthetrainingprocessisintermittentandrandom- altitude and inclination of orbit p are denoted by h p and i p ,
(cid:113)
ized,basedonuseractivityandcommunicationavailability.In respectively. Let T p = 2π(r v E p +hp) and v p = hp+ µ rE m/s,
satellite scenarios, the link (un)availability is predictable and respectively, denote the orbital period and the speed of the
relatedtothevisitingpatternofthesatellitestothelocationat satellites in orbit p where r = 6371km is the Earth radius
E
which the GS is positioned. This GS orchestrated FL scenario and µ = 3.98 × 1014m3/s2 is the geocentric gravitational
was first identified in [5], where a new asynchronous FL constant. A satellite can communicate with the GS if it is in a
procedure is proposed that addresses the unique challenges visiting state, i.e., the line-of-sight link between it and the GS
is not blocked by the Earth. Otherwise, it is in a non-visiting
This work was funded in part by by the German Research Foundation
state. The line-of-sight link between the satellite k and the
(DFG) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy (EXC 2077 at University of
Bremen,UniversityAllowance). GS is available when π 2 − ∠(⃗r GS ,⃗r k −⃗r GS ) ≥ α e , where
ISBN: 978-1-6654-6798-8 1102 EUSIPCO 2022

--- Page 2 ---
⃗r and ⃗r denote the positions of satellite k and the GS, where f (xxx,www) is the per-sample loss function at satellite k
k GS k
respectively, and α is the minimum elevation angle. and builds upon the learning target which can be any convex
e
Wedefinetwotimeinstantsofsignificance.Therisetimeof or non-convex function. The vector www denotes the parameter
the k-th satellite tn is the time instant at which the satellite describing the model.
r,k
enters in its n-th visit, while the set-time tn is the time Local raw dataset of each satellite is kept private, i.e., it is
s,k
instant at which the satellite finishes its n-th visit. The rise- shared neither with other satellites nor with the GS. Satellites
time sequences of all K satellites τ is expressed as aim to collaboratively minimize a global loss function
rise
τ rise = (cid:16)(cid:8) tn r,1 (cid:9)N n= 1 1 , (cid:8) tn r,2 (cid:9)N n= 2 2 ,..., (cid:8) tn r,K (cid:9)N n= K K (cid:17) , (1) F(www)= (cid:88) D kF (www), (8)
k∈K D k
where t r,k =
(cid:110)
tn r,k
(cid:111)N
n= k 1 is the rise-time sequence of the k-th where D = (cid:80) k∈K D k is the total number of samples. Unlike
satellite with N being the number of visiting states of the the well-known FedAvg algorithm [4], which has only one
k
k-th satellite in the considered time interval [T ,T ]. Without counter for the global epoch, we define counters for the GS
b f
loss of generality, we assume both T and T are located in and each satellite. The global epoch of the model is denoted
b f
the off-time of all satellites. Similarly, the set-time sequences as n which is kept track by the GS. In addition, for any
of all K satellites τ is given by satellite k, a local counter n is defined to track the satellite
set k
τ set = (cid:16)(cid:8) tn s,1 (cid:9)N n= 1 1 , (cid:8) tn s,2 (cid:9)N n= 2 2 ,..., (cid:8) tn s,K (cid:9)N n= K K (cid:17) , (2) p an ar d ti f c u i l p l a c t l i i o e n n . t F p o a r rt e ic x i a p m at p io le n , , i n n k a = sc n en f a o r r io al w lk it . h W sy e n f c u h rt r h o e n r o d u e s fi F n L e
wwwn to be the global model parameters at epoch n. Assuming
where t =
(cid:110)
tn
(cid:111)Nk
is the set-time sequence of the k-th each satellites trains the model locally for I iterations using
s,k s,k
satellite. n=1 stochasticgradientdescent(SGD),thelocalmodelparameters
Next, we define two types of time intervals associated with of satellite k at iteration i≥1 are
these sequences. The on-time is the time interval between wwwnk,i =wwwnk,i−1−η▽F (wwwnk,i−1), (9)
the rise- and set-time, which corresponds to the duration of k k k k
a visiting state. The off-time is a time interval between two wherewwwnk,0 is the global model received by satellite k in its
k
visiting states. On-time sequence for all K satellites τ on is n k -th update and η is the learning rate. Following the linear
defined as computation time model from [8], the time t (k) required by
τ = (cid:16)(cid:8) [tn ,tn ] (cid:9)N1 ,..., (cid:8) [tn ,tn ] (cid:9)NK (cid:17) , (3) satellite k to compute an update to the globa l l model is
on r,1 s,1 n=1 r,K s,K n=1
where t on,k = (cid:110) [tn r,k ,tn s,k ] (cid:111)N n= 1 1 denotes the on-time sequence t l (k)= c k IS ν k (D k ) , (10)
of the k-th satellite. Off-time sequences of the satellites τ
off where c is the number of CPU cycles required to process a
is also expressed as k
single data bit, S(D ) is the size of data in bits, and ν is the
k k
τ = (cid:16)(cid:8) tn (cid:9)N1+1 ,..., (cid:8) tn (cid:9)NK+1 (cid:17) (4) CPU frequency.
off off,1 n=1 off,k n=1
B. Communication Model
where
t off,k = (cid:8) tn off,k (cid:9)N n= k+ 1 1 = (cid:110) [T b ,t1 r,k ],[t1 s,k ,t2 r,k ],...,[tN s,k k,T f ] (cid:111) . if t C h o e m li m ne un o i f ca s t i i g o h n t b b e e t t w w e e e e n n t a he s m ate i l s lit n e ot an b d lo t c h k e ed G b S y is th p e o E ss a i r b th le ,
(5) i.e., satellite k is in the on-time period with E(k)=E . The
on
The state E(t,k) denotes the visiting state of the k-th signal to noise ratio (SNR) between the k-th satellite and the
satellite at time instant t, defined as GS is written as [9]
(cid:40) (cid:40)
E(t,k)= E on , t∈t on,k (6) SNR(k,GS)= N P 0 t L G ( k k G ,G G S S ) , if E(k)=E on (11)
E off , t∈t off,k 0, if E(k)=E off ,
where E on and E off refer to on-time and off-time states, where P t is the transmission power, G k and G GS are the
respectively. For simplicity, in the following we remove the averageantennagainsofsatellitektowardsGSandviceversa,
time component t and denote the state of satellite k by E(k). N =k TB is the total noise power with k =1.380649×
0 B B
10−23J/K being the Boltzmann constant, T is the receiver
A. Computation Model
noisetemperature,andB isthechannelbandwidth.Freespace
Each satellite k gathers a local dataset D k ={xxx 1 ,...,xxx Dk } path loss L(k,GS) between the k-th satellite and the GS is
from the Earth where xxx i and D k denote the i-th sample and expressed as
the number of samples of this satellite, respectively. This data (cid:18) 4πf d(k,GS) (cid:19)2
is used to train a ML model in which each satellite k builds L(k,GS)= c , (12)
c
a loss function F (www) expressed as
k
1 (cid:88) where f c is the carrier frequency, c is the speed of light,
F k (www)= D k xxx∈Dk f k (xxx,www), (7) and d(k,GS) is the distance between satellite k and the
1103

--- Page 3 ---
Information of
satellites
Visiting Sequence of
constellations
Pattern Scheduling transmissions Desired design
Algorithm criterion
Position of
(𝑉𝑃) (𝑆𝑇)
ground station
(GS)
Inputs Step1 Step 2 Step 3 Output
Fig.2. SatelliteschedulingAlgorithm.
GS. Maximum achievable data rate for satellite k under the
Gaussian channel assumption is
R(k,GS)=Blog 2 (1+SNR(k,GS)). (13) S10
WeusethelongestdistancebetweeneachsatelliteandtheGS
S9
S8
ineachon-timedurationtoderivetheSNRandrate.Thetime
S7
for exchanging the model parameters www between satellite k S6
and the GS then is S5
S(www) d(k,GS) S4
t c (k,GS)= R(k,GS) + c , (14) S3
S2
where S(www) and d(k,GS) aretherequiredtimefortransmis- S1
R(k,GS) c
sion and propagation, respectively, and S(www) is the data size 00:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 24:00
Time (hour)
of www in bits.
III. THEPROPOSEDSCHEDULINGALGORITHM
As mentioned above, a satellite can communicate with the
GS when there is a line of sight link between them which
meanssatellitek isintheE state.Asanoteworthyfact,the on
rotation of Earth causes duration between visits of a satellite
to the same GS to be different from its orbital period T . p
Federated Averaging (FedAvg) algorithm is a well-known
and widely employed FL procedure [4], [10]. Using it to
train a FL model on satellites with full client participation [6]
roughly works as follows: 1) The GS transmits the global
modelparameterstoallsatelliteswhentheyvisit;2)Satellites
trainthemodelusinglocalSGD;3)Satellitessendtheupdated
local parameters to the GS upon their next visit; and 4) The
GS aggregates received model parameters from all satellites.
Implementing FedAvg in ground-assisted FL on satellites
scenarios leads to very slow model convergence because
satellites visit the GS at different times and the GS has to
wait for all updates to receive before starting a new global
epoch. An asynchronous version of FedAvg algorithm, named
FedSat,isproposedin[5]forthesatellitescenariosandshown
to significantly reduce the convergence time. In FedSat, the
GS updates the global model parameters whenever it receives
updated local parameters from one of the satellites.
In this paper, we propose a general approach that helps in
implementing the FL for any form of satellite constellation.
This approach, as shown in Fig. 2, consists of three consecu-
tivesteps.TheinputsarethesatellitesandtheGSinformation
suchasthenumberofsatellitesandtheiraltitudes,inclinations,
and initial positions, plus the position of the GS.
With this input data, in the first step, the visiting pattern
between each satellite and the GS can be obtained in the
setilletas
fo nrettap
gnitisiV
Visible to GS Non-visible to GS
Fig. 3. Visiting pattern of 10 satellites and the GS in Bremen in one day.
SatellitesS1 toS5 areataltitude500kmandS6 toS10 areataltitude2000
km.
considered time i.e. [T ,T ]. An example of this visiting b f
pattern is illustrated in Fig. 3. This figure presents the visiting
pattern for a period of 24-hour between the GS, located in
Bremen, and ten satellites. Five of the satellites, S to S , are
1 5
ataltitude500kmandtheotherfive,S toS ,areataltitude
6 10
2000 km. The rise-time, τ , set-time, τ , on-time, τ , and
rise set on
off-time, τ , of all satellites are derived in this step. Let us
off
define the visiting pattern, VP, as
VP =(τ ,τ ). (15)
rise set
Inthesecondstep,aschedulingalgorithmisdesignedbased
on the derived VP. For example, the algorithm that will be
proposed in Section III-B uses VP to determine whether the
satellite trains the next model iteration while being offline or
during its next visit to the GS. This is illustrated in Fig. 4.
Scheduling algorithm in the second step leads to determining
the transmission times between the satellites and the GS in
the third step, i.e., the time intervals in which the UL and DL
transmissions to exchange the model parameters happen are
extracted.Letusdefinethesequenceoftransmissionreferring
to these time intervals as
ST =(τ ,τ ), (16) UL DL
where τ and τ are tuples specified by
UL DL
τ =(t ,t ,...,t ), (17)
UL u,1 u,2 u,K
τ =(t ,t ,...,t ), (18)
DL d,1 d,2 d,K
1104

--- Page 4 ---
Enter to on-time time, satellite k transmits the updated local model parameters
on-time
to the GS. Then, the GS updates global model parameters by
off-time
Request to receive
the global MP Enter to on-time wwwn+1 =wwwn−α k (wwwn k k−1,I −wwwn k k,I). (22)
Rec M ei P v e f r t o h m e g G lo S bal where α k is D D k. Then, the GS transmits the updated model
parameterstothatsatellite.Again,thesatellitetrainsthemodel
Transmit the
updated MP to GS in the off-time period and transmits the model parameters
Train the model to the GS in the next rise-time. This algorithm does not
Wait to visit the GS
take on-time and off-time durations into account. However,
Transmit the
if the satellite’s next visit to the GS will be long enough to
updated MP to GS Wait to visit the GS
complete the training during that visit, obtaining the global
model already at the current visit will lead to considerable
modelstaleness,whichhasanegativeimpactonconvergence.
NO Next on-time YES Train the model Exploiting this simple observation is the key idea behind the
is less than
training time FedSatSchedule algorithm proposed next.
Request to receive
the global MP B. FederatedLearningSchedulingforSatelliteConstellations
(FedSatSchedule)
Receive the global
MP from GS In FedSat scheme, as mentioned above, the duration of
each visit i.e. t is not taken into account when deriving
Enter to off-time on,k
t and t for ST. However, due to the fact that the
Enter to off-time u,k d,k
length of t and t are completely predictable, ST can
Fig. 4. Flow chart of FedSatSchedule algorithm, the red and green colors on,k off,k
representtheoff-timeandon-timeintervals,respectively.MPstandsformodel be determined such that a higher training accuracy can be
parameters. achievedinashortertimeframe.TheFedSatSchedulescheme
usesthesetimestoscheduletheFLaimedatconvergencetime
where t and t are sequences of the UL and DL trans-
u,k d,k reduction.Formalizingthisinourgeneralframework,(21)can
mission times associated with the k-th satellites, given by
be converted to
t u,k = (cid:8) tn u,k (cid:9)U n= k 1 , (19) ST∗ =argminCT(VP,ST) (23)
ST
t = (cid:8) tn (cid:9)Dk . (20) where CT is the convergence time of the model which, in its
d,k d,k n=1
turn,isafunctionofVP andST.Solvingthisproblemexactly
In (19) and (20), U k and D k stand for the total number of is challenging, as even the functional relation CT is difficult
ULandDLtransmissionsofthek-thsatellite,respectively.To to define. Instead, we take a heuristic approach that aims to
obtaintheoptimalST,weformulateanoptimizationproblem reducethemodelstalenessatthesatelliteswhilestillensuring
expressed as that every satellite provides a model update during each visit
ST∗ =argmaxC(VP,ST), (21) to the GS. In particular, the scheduler predicts whether the
ST next visit to the GS is long enough to complete a local model
where C, as a function of VP and ST, is a desired design update. If this is the case, the satellite will receive the current
criterion which should be defined based on the requirements global model parameters upon its next contact to the GS.
ofanyspecificproblem.Anexampleofthiscriterionfunction Otherwise, it will receive them immediately and compute its
is given in section III-B. update during its off-time. We design this procedure named
By using the proposed three-step thorough model, in the ”FedSatSchedule” explicitly next.
following, we present a new scheduling algorithm named as In FedSatSchedule algorithm, in the current on-time i.e.
FedSatSchedule. To define this scheme, at first, we briefly [tn ,tn ], the k-th satellite decides about the required opera-
r,k s,k
explain FedSat, the scheme that we proposed in our previous tionsbasedoncomparingthedurationofthenexton-timeand
work [5]. the necessary time for training; whether tn s, + k 1−tn r, + k 1 <t l (k)
or not. The flow chart in Fig. 4, in detail shows the tasks to
A. Federated Learning for Satellite Constellations (FedSat)
be done during the n-th on-time period.
One way to implement FL for the satellite constellations, is If the next on-time period, tn+1−tn+1, is shorter than the
s,k r,k
using an asynchronous algorithm as presented in FedSat [5]. required training time, t (k), the satellite requests that the GS
l
By this approach, we can benefit from the predictability sendstheglobalmodelparametersinthesamevisiti.e.(n)-th
of satellites visiting pattern which helps to overcome the on-timeperiod.Then,thesatellitebyusingthereceivedglobal
intermittent connectivity between the GS and satellites. parameters,trainsthemodelinthecomingoff-timeperiodi.e.
In FedSat, each satellite exchanges the model parameters [tn ,tn+1]. Afterwards, in the (n+1)-th on-time interval, it
s,k r,k
withtheGSwhentheyvisiteachother.Thismeansintherise- transmits the updated parameters to the GS.
1105

--- Page 5 ---
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 8 16 24 32 40 48
Time [h]
ycaruccA
tseT
Weexaminetheimpactofthetrainingtimeofeachsatellite,
t (k), on the test-accuracy. Fig. 5 shows the test accuracy for
l
three different training time, 30 seconds, 15 minutes and 30
minutes,foraperiodoftwodays.Itdepictsthatourproposed
schedulingalgorithmcannoticeablyimprovethetestaccuracy
for the cases t (k) = 30 seconds and t (k) = 15 minutes
l l
compared to the FedSat.
We observe if t (k) = 30 seconds, it takes 48 hours
l
for the FedSat to have a test accuracy around 62%, while
FedSatSchedulet
l
(k)=30sec. for the FedSatSchedule, it takes only 16 hours, improving
FedSatSchedulet l (k)=15min. the convergcne speed by a factor of three. FedSatSchedule
FedISatSchedulet
l
(k)=30min. outperformsFedSatduetoaproperschedulingtoreceivemore
FedSat up-to-date model parameters.
By increasing the training time interval, as we see in the
case with the t (k) = 30 minutes, the performances of the
l
FedSat and FedSatSchedule converge together. In such cases,
Fig. 5. Test Accuracy of a LEO constellation with 10 satellites and a GS all satellites have, in practice, to train the model in their
locatedinBremen. off-time period. So, the FedSatSchedule cannot benefit from
having more up-to-date model parameters.
V. CONCLUSION
Instead,ifthenexton-timeperiodislongerthantherequired
In this paper, we have presented a general approach for
time for training, the satellite will have enough time for
optimally scheduling the transmission and reception time
training using more up-to-date parameters in the coming on-
of the model parameters between the satellites and the GS
time interval. Note that, in the off-time interval, the GS
for implementing FL in any constellation. Then, we have
keeps updating the model parameters based on the received
specificallydesignedaschedulingalgorithm,FedSatSchedule,
parameters from other satellites. Then, the k-th satellite had
by considering the duration of each on-time. The numerical
better wait and receive up-to-date model parameters exactly
resultshaveshownthatthisschemecanacceleratetheconver-
before starting to train in the next on-time interval. Hence,
gence of FL.
the satellite instead of requesting for receiving the new model
REFERENCES
parametersinthen-thon-timeinterval,willdoitinthe(n+1)-
th on-time. With the received parameters, the satellite trains [1] I. Leyva-Mayorga, B. Soret, M. Ro¨per, D. Wu¨bben, B. Matthiesen,
A.Dekorsy,andP.Popovski,“LEOsmall-satelliteconstellationsfor5G
the model and transmits the updated model parameters to the
and beyond-5G communications,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 184955–
GS in the (n+1)-th on-time. This approach results in higher 184964,2020.
accuracy without adding more delay or using extra resources. [2] J. M. Haut, M. E. Paoletti, S. Moreno-A´lvarez, J. Plaza, J.-A. Rico-
Gallego, and A. Plaza, “Distributed deep learning for remote sensing
datainterpretation,”ProceedingsoftheIEEE,vol.109,no.8,pp.1320–
IV. NUMERICALRESULTS 1349,2021.
[3] G. Curzi, D. Modenini, and P. Tortora, “Large constellations of small
Inthissection,wepresentsimulationresultstoshowtheef- satellites:Asurveyofnearfuturechallengesandmissions,”Aerospace,
fectivenessoftheproposed scheme.Weconsidertensatellites vol.7,no.9,p.133,2020.
[4] H.B.McMahan,E.Moore,D.Ramage,S.Hampson,andB.Agueray
in 10 orbits; five of them are at altitude 500 km and the other
Arcas,“Communication-efficientlearningofdeepnetworksfromdecen-
fiveareataltitude2000kmwithaGSlocatedinBremen.The tralizeddata,”ser.Proc.Mach.Learn.Res.(PMLR),vol.54,2017.
minimum difference in right ascension of the ascending node [5] N.Razmi,B.Matthiesen,A.Dekorsy,andP.Popovski,“Ground-assisted
federatedlearninginLEOsatelliteconstellations,”IEEEWirelessCom-
(RAAN) between two near orbits of different altitudes is 36°.
municationsLetters,pp.1–1,2022.
The inclination and minimum elevation angles of all satellites [6] N.Razmi,B.Matthiesen,A.Dekorsy,P.Popovski,“On-boardfederated
are set to 80° and 10°, respectively. All satellites and the GS learning for dense LEO constellations,” in ICC 2022 - IEEE Interna-
tionalConferenceonCommunications(ICC),2022.
transmit the model parameters on channels with bandwidth
[7] J.So,K.Hsieh,B.Arzani,S.Noghabi,S.Avestimehr,andR.Chandra,
of 20 MHz with the transmission power set to 40 dBm. The “Fedspace: An efficient federated learning framework at satellites and
transmit and receive antenna gains are both set to 6.98 dBi. groundstations,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2202.01267,2022.
[8] N. H. Tran, W. Bao, A. Zomaya, M. N. H. Nguyen, and C. S. Hong,
The carrier frequency and the receiver noise temperature are
“Federatedlearningoverwirelessnetworks:Optimizationmodeldesign
f c =2.4GHz and T =290 K, respectively. andanalysis,”inIEEEINFOCOM2019-IEEEConferenceonComputer
For training process based on [11], the well-known CIFAR Communications,2019,pp.1387–1395.
[9] L.J.IppolitoJr,SatelliteCommunicationsSystemsEngineering. John
dataset with the ResNet-18 model is considered. The learning
Wiley&Sons,2017.
rate, η, and the batch sizes are set to 0.1 and 10, respectively. [10] Z. Li and P. Richta´rik, “A unified analysis of stochastic gradi-
ThewholeCIFARdatasetisdividedbetweenallsatelliteswith ent methods for nonconvex federated optimization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2006.07013,2020.
Non-IIDsettingssuchthatfivelabelsaregiventothesatellites
[11] C. He, S. Li, J. So, X. Zeng, M. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Wang,
at altitude 500 and the other five labels to the other five at P. Vepakomma, A. Singh, H. Qiu et al., “FedML: A research li-
altitude 2000 km. brary and benchmark for federated machine learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.13518,2020.
1106